COMPUTER:
The directions for a human
being are written in code
three billion letters long.
These instructions tell
our bodies how to live,
how to grow, how to die.
Researchers call this code
"The Sequence."
Captioning sponsored by THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
I'm Lucky Severson and this is
Secrets of the Sequence.
There was an obscure song
on the radio back in the '60s
that starts out, "Are you
a boy or are you a girl?
With your long, brown hair,
you look like a girl."
The singer is obviously confused
by outward appearances,
but to geneticists there
is almost no confusion.
The genetics of sex are
virtually certain at conception,
though whether you're
a boy or a girl
seems to be
a toss of the genetic coin.
COMPUTER:
On Sexual Determination:
In the human genome, there
are 23 pairs of chromosomes.
For 22 of those pairs,
a chromosome
from the father teams up
with the same chromosome
from the mother.
The 23rd pair is different.
It can come in an X version
and a Y version.
The egg always has
a single X chromosome.
Sperm can carry
either an X or a Y.
If it's an X, the embryo
develops with an XX pair,
and it is female.
If the fertilizing sperm
carries a Y, it is a boy.
Since you have to add something
to make a male,
clearly, the default human being
is female.
Um, in any case, somewhere
there-- 83, 84, 85...
SEVERSON:
Dr. David Page
teaches and researches
the subject of sex chromosomes,
and the Y chromosome
in particular.
Once it was established that
you were healthy enough to cry,
what was the next question
on your parents' mind,
on everybody else's mind?
AUDIENCE MEMBERS:
"Boy or a girl?"
"Boy or a girl,"
you got it.
So how did your parents
or doctors
or whoever else
was in the delivery room,
how did they figure out whether
you were a boy or a girl?
( laughter )
Well, there's a lot
of laughing here, uh...
So they took a look
and they saw whether
your external genitalia
were those of a male
or a female.
And so having determined
that you were a girl or a boy,
on this basis,
your parents could finally
decide what name to give you,
and they could announce
your existence to the world.
SEVERSON:
David Page wears several hats
in the research community.
He teaches biology
and genetics at MIT,
conducts research
on the sex chromosomes
at the Whitehead Institute,
and gives public lectures.
His current focus is to find out
why the Y, or male chromosome,
is unlike all the others
in the genome.
PAGE:
A typical chromosome
has a few thousand genes.
The Y chromosome has only about
40 or 50 different genes on it.
So it's a relatively sparsely
populated, rural chromosome.
But what are those genes?
There's a gene on the Y
chromosome called SRY--
that stands for sex-determining
region of the Y chromosome.
The SRY gene on the Y chromosome
has a very important role
in all of our lives.
SEVERSON:
Before fertilization,
the egg has the potential
to become either
a male or female embryo.
The decision to develop ovaries
and be female
or develop testes and be male,
is made by a single gene
on the Y chromosome
called the SRY gene.
PAGE:
So seven weeks after the egg
that gave rise to us
was fertilized by the sperm
that gave rise to us,
seven weeks after that happened,
the SRY gene, if it's present,
raises its hand
and says "I'm here"--
instructs a number
of other genes
to start the process
of making a testis.
But then it disappears
and is never heard from again.
SEVERSON:
That makes SRY a pretty
important male gene
and the Y chromosome
emphatically the male
chromosome.
But what about
the other 50 genes on the Y?
PAGE:
Then there is the BLZ-2 locus,
which is self-confidence
unlinked to ability, um.
Then, identifying aircraft,
MOM-4-U,
which is a fascination with
spiders and reptiles and such.
No other chromosome
gets cartoons like this
made about it.
The Y has suffered through years
and years of misunderstanding.
SEVERSON:
So there are three types
of genes on the Y chromosome.
SRY triggers the formation
of the testes.
There's a type
of housekeeping genes
that regulate
basic cell functioning,
and another type,
like the DAZ gene,
is responsible
for sperm production.
PAGE:
So you have to keep them...
So, what's the story?
You have to keep them
pretty dense
to keep them from...
Um, you have to keep them
at intermediate density.
Yeah, they look pretty juicy
to me, pretty good.
SEVERSON:
About one in every 4,000 boys
is born with a hole
in his Y chromosome
that causes male infertility.
Page's lab is putting
human sperm-making genes
into infertile mice
to see which ones are the most
important to male fertility.
PAGE:
In this case,
a defect has been produced
in a mouse spermatogenesis gene.
We're going to see if we can do
a little gene therapy
on this mouse
and rescue that defect,
using the human Y
spermatogenesis gene,
and that will, in turn, tell us
a lot about how the human
Y spermatogenesis gene works.
SEVERSON:
Figure that out, and it could
lead to a fertility therapy.
One in six American couples
is infertile,
and about one-third of the time
it's caused by the male.
It's just one
of the genetic puzzles
that makes the Y chromosome
so important
to both males and females.
The one question
that I'm asked most frequently
is what do these X and Y
chromosomes have to do
with... with sexual orientation?
Do these,
do the X and the Y chromosomes
make you straight or gay?
We don't yet understand much,
if anything,
about the connection
between the sex chromosomes
and how sexual identity, uh,
and sexual preference
is actually established
in the mind.
Once the embryo decides
to make testes or ovaries
under the influence
or absence of SRY,
then those-- the testis
or the ovary--
then produces sex hormones,
the famous things
like testosterone and estrogen
and so on.
And these sex hormones
are actually responsible
for masculinizing or feminizing
many of the other
parts of the body,
including,
it's thought, the brain.
SEVERSON:
So now we know
what the difference
between girls and boys is--
a gene called SRY.
The U.S. Senate
recently failed to act
on anti-cloning
legislation,
which means there probably
won't be any this year,
but the issue is not going away.
As one newspaper
headline put it,
"Cloning has put the 'political'
back in 'science'."
That's literally true
in the case of Francis Fukuyama,
one of America's foremost
political scientists,
who also sits on the president's
Bioethics Council.
In a new book, Our Posthuman
Future, Fukuyama argues
that some of the most profound
and unprecedented changes
in history may be on the way.
Of course, we've been changing
things about ourselves
since the beginning
of the species--
knowledge and abilities,
habits, appearance.
FUKUYAMA:
The one thing
that they have not been able
to alter thus far is
the basic genetic makeup
of the human species,
which is something
that was basically given to us
by evolution.
And the "posthuman future"
refers to the prospect
down the road
that we will at some point
be able to consciously
take control of that process
of genetic design
and essentially reshape,
you know, what human beings
are by nature.
SEVERSON:
Fukuyama warns of the social
and political consequences
of even
the most benign changes
like the fact
that we live longer.
FUKUYAMA:
Europe in 50 years is going to
have a median age of about 60--
50% of the population
will be 60 years or older--
and that part of the world
will be surrounded
by a Third World, where the
median age is around 22 or 23.
SEVERSON:
And issues with
even more profound implications
are on the horizon.
FUKUYAMA:
Human germ-line engineering,
if it becomes possible,
will be probably
the most consequential
simply because when you start
making these changes,
they are irreversible--
they're handed down
to descendants.
They really offer the chance
of changing
the fundamental structure
of what a human being is.
SEVERSON:
Though the actual retooling
of the human genome
is a good ways off,
Fukuyama is convinced
that this science
is too important
to be left
entirely to the scientists.
He wants a new regulatory agency
staffed both by scientists
and non-scientists.
And it's not that scientists
have bad motives at all.
I mean, they have
very good motives.
But, you know, their interests
don't necessarily correspond
to the public interest,
and so therefore,
I think there is a need
to somewhat democratize
that decision-making process.
SEVERSON:
Can it be done--
fencing off areas prohibited
to scientific advance?
Francis Fukuyama believes
it can, and he is not alone.
MAN:
I think it would be
morally reprehensible
to despair at the possibility
of trying to exercise
some control
over where this engine is going.
The atomic scientists
had a genie out of the bottle
at the end of World War II.
The biologists
are in the same place.
Dr. Leon Kass is also on
the president's bioethics panel.
In fact, he chairs it.
The group was set up last year
to advise the president
on the relevant issues.
But the president didn't
even wait for its advice,
instead immediately calling
for a total ban
on therapeutic cloning.
For some background
on the issue,
let's see what
our computer has on file.
COMPUTER:
Therapeutic cloning--
or "somatic cell
nuclear transfer"--
involves removing the nucleus
from a human egg
and replacing it with the
nucleus of a cell from a donor.
The nucleus contains the donor's
entire genetic code.
As the egg divides,
it develops an inner core
of embryonic stem cells,
which could be harvested
and returned to the donor
to replace
or repair damaged tissue
without the problem
of tissue rejection.
Some fear that permitting
therapeutic cloning
could lead
to reproductive cloning--
the cloning of human beings--
or even to manufacturing embryos
to harvest their healthy organs
for the sick and disabled.
Our children... are gifts
to be loved and protected,
not products to be designed
and manufactured.
Allowing cloning would be taking
a significant step
toward a society
in which human beings
are grown for spare body parts
and children are engineered
to custom specifications,
and that's not acceptable.
SEVERSON:
But those who believe in the
promise of therapeutic cloning
reject that argument.
MAN:
This...
clump of cells that will never
leave the laboratory
is not the union
of male and female.
It's an egg
that gets its DNA
and its nucleus taken out.
SEVERSON:
Hollywood Superman
Christopher Reeve was paralyzed
in a riding accident in 1995.
Since then, he's learned
about-- and campaigned for--
research on
spinal cord injuries.
He's convinced that stem cells
cloned from his own DNA
might heal his injured
spinal cord,
enabling him to walk again.
REEVE:
You're not even working
with an embryo;
you're working with an egg
that has not been fertilized.
You must see the distinction.
There are 400,000 people
with spinal cord injuries,
and there are many, many more
who have other disabilities
that could have been helped
by saved stem cells.
SEVERSON:
Not surprisingly, the Religious
Right sees it differently.
JERRY FALWELL:
If it's embryonic
stem cell research,
it all involves
the destruction of an embryo,
and so it begins
with an abortion.
I would say it's never right
to do wrong to accomplish right.
SEVERSON:
So is this one of those
black-and-white issues,
or a more shaded,
nuanced dilemma?
KASS:
What we're dealing with here
is not simply
a case of good versus evil,
but a case of competing goods,
or a case where the evils,
such as they are,
are so closely embedded
in the goods
that you can't simply
tease them out
without forgoing the one
or embracing the other.
As a biologist,
I've come to somehow regard
the earliest stages of human
life as not humanly nothing.
SEVERSON:
To other bioethicists, that
position seems simply wrong.
The notion that potential
ingredients of people
are the same as people is one
that doesn't seem to me
to be factually correct.
My personal view is that there
is a kind of rising moral status
that begins at conception
and continues, in fact,
until you become an adult.
And so it would be permissible
to do certain things
with embryos that it would not
be permissible to do
with a later-stage fetus or
certainly with an actual infant.
SEVERSON:
Both Fukuyama and Kass
would draw a red line
between repairing and
enhancement, or modification.
Are these questions
that may affect the future
of the human species?
And who should decide--
the scientists themselves
or government?
CAPLAN:
If you believe in choice,
and you don't want to wind up
with a government-imposed vision
of genetic normalcy
or genetic desirability,
you've got to let people
make their choices,
and I would allow some limits
if it turned out
that the choices
that individuals were making
about genetics
were skewing the safety
or stability of a society.
Science is, by its
own self-definition,
morally neutral,
whereas if you've got moral
dimensions to a question,
those are really for the
community as a whole to decide.
The debate will go on, whatever
congress and the president do
because of the profound
importance of these issues
to the human--
or posthuman-- future.
There are two kinds of
cloning:
reproductive and therapeutic.
Reproductive cloning seeks
to reproduce
entire living organisms,
and we've done this
with goats, cats, sheep,
cows, mice and pigs.
Therapeutic cloning,
on the other hand, seeks
to create not a whole organism,
but just a few special cells
that might be used
to grow new tissue
or reverse genetic diseases.
COMPUTER:
Lucky, there's a problem
with the term "therapeutic"
in connection with cloning.
Many scientists insist
that creating duplicate cells
for medical experimentation
be called
"nuclear transplantation"
or "stem cell research."
They think
that calling it "cloning"
raises too many red flags.
To a layman I'm not sure
"nuclear transplantation" sounds
that much more benign,
but let's begin
at the beginning.
COMPUTER:
About cloning:
The word "clone" comes
from the Greek word klon,
which means "twig"
or "offshoot."
A clone is an identical copy
of something.
In genetics
it means genetically identical.
Cloning is
nonsexual reproduction.
It does not require the union
of male and female gametes,
or sex cells.
Genetic material from a donor
is inserted in an egg,
which has had
its own nucleus removed.
When the egg divides,
it will reproduce
the inserted genetic material.
SEVERSON:
There is widespread agreement
that the reproductive cloning
of human beings
is and should remain taboo.
We just don't know enough
to guarantee that a cloned baby
would be born healthy,
but many favor
therapeutic cloning,
and that research is under way
in a number of laboratories.
This is how it works.
First the cloners need eggs.
They remove the genetic material
from the egg and discard it.
These are skin cells
from a mammal
that's going to be cloned.
Each dark spot
is a nucleus containing the
genetic material of the cell.
The nucleus is extracted
from the rest of the cell
for use in the empty egg.
One skin cell nucleus
is injected into each empty egg
so the genetic instructions
that came with the egg
have been replaced
with the genetic instructions
from the skin cell.
After electrical
and chemical manipulation,
a few of these cells may begin
to grow into embryos.
Once scientists have mastered
the creation and nurturing
of these embryos long enough
for stem cells to develop,
they can explore
the possibilities
for organ and tissue repair.
MAN:
With therapeutic cloning, you're
starting out with one cell,
and that one cell becomes two,
then those two become four,
the four become eight,
and then you're
actually watching this
under the microscope,
and you can see
once you get to a certain level
and a certain volume of cells,
there's an approximate volume
of cells
where you can actually take
the cells and start using them
for different purposes.
You can convert these cells
into different tissue structures
whether it be heart muscle,
skeletal muscle,
cartilage, bone, et cetera,
and you can then expand these
cells into large quantities
and have them available
for the patient.
SEVERSON:
Dr. Atala is talking
about human embryonic stem cells
from which he hopes
to grow completely new organs.
It's called tissue engineering.
He could use the stem cells
already approved
by the U.S. government
but they don't solve
one important basic problem:
They don't come
from the patient who needs them.
ATALA:
The fact is that
even if you are able
to obtain stem cells
from embryonic sources
and even if you are able
to differentiate those cells
to take those cells
and create tissue for therapy,
once you go through
that whole process,
there is no guarantee
that once it gets to the patient
that patient is not going
to reject it,
because it's not recognizing
that tissue as their own.
And that is where therapeutic
cloning can provide an answer,
because you're not using
somebody else's cells.
You're using
the patient's own cells,
and that makes a big difference.
SEVERSON:
Dr. Atala collaborates
with Robert Lanza
of Advanced Cell Technology,
a biotech company
in Worcester, Massachusetts.
Despite all the controversy,
ACT has staked its future
on therapeutic
cloning technology
for both organ replacement
and cell therapy.
LANZA:
Our objective is actually
to not to clone a whole copy
of a person or a whole animal
but to basically
just clone cells.
We want to clone cells
that can be used
for replacement purposes.
You know, there are literally
hundreds and hundreds
of diseases that this technology
could be used to treat--
for instance,
Parkinson's disease.
If you wanted
to put in new neurons
or if you had kidney failure
or heart failure,
we could grow you up
either new heart cells
or even eventually
an entire heart.
SEVERSON:
The controversy arises because
a potential life is destroyed
to obtain those stem cells.
LANZA:
We're talking about
a microscopic ball of cells
that doesn't have
a single body cell yet.
It hasn't even decided
what it wants to do.
So the question here is
is whether or not you're going
to take this microscopic ball
of cells
and alleviate a lifetime
of suffering in a patient
or whether or not
you're just going to discard it.
I think the whole question is
is whether or not a completely
undifferentiated ball of cells
that's microscopic--
smaller than the head of a pin--
warrants the same rights
and reverence
as an adult or a child
who may die
because we failed
to use this technology.
If someone took that cloned ball
of undifferentiated cells
and implanted it
in a human uterus,
could it be used to reproduce
a living, breathing human being?
The troubling answer is "Yes."
Should we ban therapeutic
cloning of human beings
which might help millions
to prevent reproductive cloning
of humans?
That's a harder question
to answer.
...substantially
to the placenta.
SEVERSON:
Rudolf Jaenisch
of the Whitehead Institute
in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
thinks the scientific reasons
not to clone a living
human being are very strong.
Based on studies
of cloned animals
and his own cloning research,
he believes that the process
of reproductive cloning
is too unpredictable
and imperfect to try
on a human being,
and he is scornful of those
who are attempting to do it.
JAENISCH:
They need to be stopped,
because what will come out,
and I think we are pretty...
I think it's with
quite some, um, confidence
we can predict this.
What they will produce
are abnormal people,
and, um, you don't want
to use people as guinea pigs.
SEVERSON:
But Jaenisch feels differently
about therapeutic cloning,
which he believes could
create embryonic stem cells
and lead to cures for diseases.
JAENISCH:
Now, these embryonic stem cells
are really amazing cells.
They have the potential
to... in culture
to develop into any tissue type
of your body.
So they are shown that they...
We know they can develop
into neurons and nerve cells,
into, um, muscle cells,
into heart muscle cells,
into blood cells,
um, into cartilage,
into bone, into anything.
They are now a source
of any tissue type
you might want to use
to transplant back
into the donor
and of course since genetically
they are identical,
the immune system
wouldn't mind that.
It wouldn't reject those cells.
There is the potential of what
we call regenerative medicine
or transplantation medicine,
and this is all
under the umbrella term
"therapeutic cloning."
You know, Great Britain
has banned reproductive cloning
but is allowing research
into human cloning for
therapeutic purposes to proceed.
Meanwhile, a bill to ban
human cloning of any kind
for therapeutic
or reproductive purposes
is moving very slowly
through the U.S. Congress.
In future episodes,
we'll explore the ethical
dimensions of the cloning debate
and hear from two men who have
very different perspectives:
the Reverend Jerry Falwell
and actor Christopher Reeve.
When we think about patents
we usually think
about inventors:
Gutenberg
and the printing press,
Morse and the telegraph,
Marconi and the radio.
We can understand patents
for inventions like these,
but what about genes?
That's right, genes.
There's a new
gold rush going on
with scientists staking claims
for treasure,
except this time,
the treasure is part of you.
( computer beeps )
COMPUTER:
About patents.
The word comes from the Latin
litterae patentes,
meaning an open letter.
Such letters were used
by medieval monarchs
to confer rights and privileges.
With a royal seal, the letters
served as proof of those rights
for all to see.
The first recorded patent
of invention was granted
to John of Utynam.
In 1449, he was awarded
a 20-year monopoly
for a glass-making process
previously unknown in England.
The first patent this year
in the United States
was assigned number 6,334,220
for an adjustable disposable
garment protector--
a bib for motorists
eating fast foods.
Well, that's all
very interesting
but not really
to the point of our story.
The question is,
do scientists have the right
to patent our genes,
to claim rights
to a piece of DNA
that is our shared inheritance,
and make money on it?
Let's meet a family
who decided to take the matter
into their own hands.
Living in a well-tended suburb
of Boston, Massachusetts
used to be everything
the Terry family wanted.
Now their American dream is
pinned on something else:
a gene patent.
Pat Terry used to be
a contractor
hired to solve the problems of
building biotech laboratories.
Now he runs PXE International,
a nonprofit foundation that
may someday find a solution
to a very specific
genetic problem.
MAN:
Five years ago I didn't know
a gene from a hubcap.
I did not have any experience
whatsoever in this realm.
But after my children
were diagnosed,
I had to become an expert
and learn as much as I can.
SEVERSON:
Pat's children,
Elizabeth and Ian,
were diagnosed with a disease
called pseudoxanthoma elasticum,
or PXE.
PXE attacks the connective
tissues of the skin, eyes
and cardiovascular system,
causing problems like severe
skin lesions, vision loss
and even sudden cardiac arrest.
And there is no known cure.
In December 1994, the Terry
family got the diagnosis
that changed their lives.
WOMAN:
I was with the kids alone.
I called Pat and told him
what the diagnosis was.
I don't think
it really hit us completely.
We tried to get
some information.
The information was scattered.
We got scared.
We did things
like bought the kids
everything they wanted
for Christmas that year.
And we booked
a trip to Europe,
thinking that they would die
by the time they were 13 or 14
was the news we got.
SEVERSON:
Only one in 25,000 people
have PXE,
so profits from any drug therapy
would be small.
Giving scientists motivation
to find a cure
for such a rare disorder
was a tall order,
but the Terrys were determined.
Using the Internet--
and using up their savings--
they collected data
and tissue samples
from 1,500 PXE patients.
They offered this unique
collection to researchers
and worked with scientists
to identify the gene.
Two years ago,
PXE International,
along with the gene's
co-founder,
the University of Hawaii,
applied for a patent
on the PXE gene.
SHARON TERRY:
I think the biggest difference
between corporate-structure
America patenting
and us patenting
is motivation.
And we have no problem
with corporate America
needing to make money,
because that's what
they need to do.
In fact we want them
to do that,
because they will make
better drugs
and they will make
disease treatments.
But for us it's
pure motivation
in terms of the patient
or the person affected.
SEVERSON:
Since filing the patent,
researchers found out that
the PXE gene is also involved
in cardiovascular disease
and macular degeneration--
diseases affecting millions.
That means their patent may have
wide application,
and that should entice
pharmaceutical companies
to research the gene
and what it does.
For the Terrys
it's the means to the end--
finding a cure
for their children.
Hi, Donna, is Nancy Taylor
available, please?
PAT TERRY:
It's a slightly different
business model
because we will be subsidizing
this patent
because it may not have
an economic engine
to survive on its own.
So we might be
subsidizing access
or leveraging access
through the patent
and licensing system
that is a little
out of the ordinary.
SEVERSON:
Many researchers believe
that what the Terrys are doing
is a model
for how gene patenting
should work for patients.
But initially, gene patents
were filed for profits,
not for cures and therapies.
MAN:
It's a very simple matter:
no patent, no drug.
A drug company manufactures
a human component.
All the research
that went into that
costs hundreds of millions
of dollars.
If that research had not been
protected with patents,
nobody would do that research.
Nobody owns a gene
in anybody's human body.
But if we have taken that gene
from a body,
we've learned how to use it
to make a substance.
That substance is useful
for medicine like insulin.
Then it's deemed
the subject for patents,
and they're very important
for the future of medicine.
SEVERSON:
But determining
legal ownership of a gene
that's held commonly by everyone
is pretty complicated.
Allowing the patenting
of human genes
would be like allowing Columbus
to patent America
or Newton to patent gravity
and make all of us pay for the
privilege of living in America
or being subject to gravity.
That's what happens
when you allow the patenting
of a product of nature.
This should not be a part
of our patent law.
And it takes something
that we all own
and should own as a community,
and lets a corporation own it
and make us pay for
the privilege of using it.
SEVERSON:
The National Institutes
of Health
were among the first
institutions to patent genes.
Since the Human Genome Project
was paid for
by the American public,
it seemed to follow that
the ownership of human genes
would be held in the public
domain, for everyone to use.
It didn't happen
that way, though.
MAN:
Whenever anybody says, "Well,
should that be patented?"
my rejoinder is, "Well, would it
help the public if it were?"
And if the answer is yes,
then let's look at that.
If the answer is no,
why are we doing that?
On the other hand,
if you're talking about snippets
of DNA of no known function
that somebody just wants to say,
"Now I own that piece.
"There's a fence around it.
Nobody can work on this
without asking my permission,"
that doesn't help
the public at all.
That does just the reverse.
It basically puts
a "No Fishing" sign
across a whole lot of the genome
and ends up slowing down
the progress of research.
He was too young to say,
"Don't take my picture now."
SEVERSON:
The last thing
the Terrys want to do
is slow the progress of research
on the PXE gene,
and they plan to give wide
access to their discoveries.
SHARON TERRY:
Our intention
in patenting the gene
was to have a place
at the table,
to be a part of the discussion,
to be a part of the plans
that would go forward from here,
and probably
most importantly,
to safeguard
what would happen
for patients
that, because we're
motivated first
by making sure
patients benefit,
we would be the voice
at the table
who would
constantly say,
"Is this the best path
for patients?"
PAT TERRY:
The reality for us to see
how rare-disease diagnostics
once the gene is found
or whatever,
the excitement is over,
the discovery process
is perceived to be over
by the scientific community and
they move on to another disease.
And we felt
that we had
the long-term interests
close to our hearts.
This is a nice
picture, too.
There are some doctors and
researchers
who want to replace the dog
as man's best friend
with the pig.
Specifically, a variety
called "miniature swine,"
which top out
at a mere 300 pounds,
well below the 1,000 or so
of adult swine.
These smaller pigs
won't be pets though;
they'll be organ donors.
After some
genetic modifications,
their organs may be used
to save human lives.
It's called a "xenograft."
COMPUTER:
Xenograft comes from
the Greek word, "xenos,"
which means "stranger"
or "guest."
Xenophobia is fear and hatred
of anything foreign or strange.
Xenografts are
tissue transplants
from one species to another--
from a pig to a human,
for example.
Normally the recipient's
immune system
would reject
such a transplant.
Human-to-human transplants
are called "allografts."
In this case, the immune system
needs to be suppressed
to avoid rejection.
Autografts are transplants
from one place to another
on the same human.
The immune system has no problem
here; it likes its own kind.
( heart rate machine bleeping )
SEVERSON:
For some 20 years now,
human-to-human transplants
seem to have worked pretty well.
So why even bother
with xenografts from pigs,
with all the immune-response
problems?
MAN:
The reason why we are all so
interested in the xenotransplant
is because, paradoxically,
the success of ordinary,
allogenic transplants
has been so great that
we have run out of organs.
There just aren't
enough cadaver organs
to satisfy the need
for all the people
whose lives could be saved
by a transplant.
That's why we're really working
so hard on this;
it's because people
are dying every day.
SEVERSON:
Right now, there are
about 80,000 patients
on waiting lists
in the United States alone
for various donor organs.
By all accounts,
16 people die each day
for want of a human donor organ.
David Sachs believes that
pig organs can fill the gap.
SACHS:
We would match
the donor to be the same size
as the recipient.
So for an adult
who weighed 70 kilograms,
we'd use a 70-kilogram pig.
WOMAN:
It's incredibly surprising
how similar the pig is to man.
It wouldn't be your choice
of your most-related relative.
But when you look at things
like heart rate, blood pressure,
serum chemistries,
the pig has...
shares an incredible amount, in
terms of physiology, with man.
SEVERSON:
So physically,
pigs are a lot like people.
Genetically, there are some
significant differences
between pigs and humans.
Powerful drugs are already used
to suppress the immune response
to a human organ transplant.
The amount of drugs needed
to suppress
the human immune response
to an unmodified pig organ
could be lethal.
The major barrier
to xenotransplantation
is rejection--
the immune response
against that transplant--
and there are two ways we
are trying to overcome that:
One is by modifying the donor
through genetic engineering,
changing some
of the antigens on the pig--
the ones that are most difficult
to overcome--
and changing those
such that there will be
much less of an immune
response to them.
And the other is by changing the
immune response of the recipient
in a specific way, which we call
"inducing tolerance."
SEVERSON:
Basically, it means making pigs
a little less piglike
and humans
a little more pig-tolerant.
It's working toward
a genetic middle ground.
For example, pigs normally
carry a gene missing in humans,
one that generates a sugar
our bodies recognize as foreign.
At the beginning of the year,
two biotechnology companies
announced
that they had cloned piglets
with that gene knocked out.
SACHS:
It turns out
that on all species except
humans and old-world primates,
the terminal sugar--
the last sugar
on the surface of all cells,
on the sugars on all cells--
is alpha 1-3 gau.
But sometime during evolution,
old-world primates and humans
lost the enzyme for that sugar.
So we don't have alpha 1-3 gau,
and therefore we make
a lot of antibody against it.
That antibody appears to be
one of the major barriers
to xenotransplantation.
SEVERSON:
Modifying pig organ donors
is half the equation.
Making human recipients more
tolerant is coming along, too.
The human thymus is where white
blood cells are programmed
to recognize invaders.
By injecting pig cells
in or near the thymus,
some white cells are trained
to accept pig tissues.
This has worked in baboons,
which serve as
the humanlike animal model.
But there is another concern:
pigs have something
called "porcine
endogenous retroviruses,"
retroviruses that are part
of the animal's own DNA.
GREENSTEIN:
Every species
has endogenous retroviruses,
and so in human transplantation
by transplanting an organ
from one human to another,
you're not exposing the human
to a new endogenous retrovirus.
We all have these pieces or
fragments of DNA in our genome.
The issue in xenotransplantation
is that we
are potentially introducing
a new endogenous retrovirus
into the patient.
SEVERSON:
Viruses that jump
from one species to another
can behave badly.
A virus, jumping from
monkey to human, for instance,
may have led to the disease
known to us as AIDS.
Tackling the virus problem
has taken time.
So has everything else
about xenograft research.
This project at Massachusetts
General Hospital
is now in its 12th year.
But now the pace
of tissue engineering research
is picking up.
So the question is,
will these pigs ever fly?
GREENSTEIN:
We've moved the survival of pig
organs in preclinical models
from minutes to hours to 30 days
to, in the extreme, almost
100 days of survival time.
Now, we think we'll be able
to put together our protocols
in the next year and a half
to two,
and once we have survival times
on the order of six months
to a year,
we'll be able to start
very small, carefully controlled
clinical trials.
The idea of knowing our roots,
where we came from is
almost irresistible.
And nowhere is it practiced
more faithfully and expertly
than within the Mormon Church,
headquartered in Salt Lake City.
Mormons trace their lineage
in order to collect names
of dead ancestors
so members can perform what are
called "baptisms for the dead."
But genealogy has long been
overlooked by technology.
The advent of the Internet
sped up the process enormously,
but it's genetics
that has revolutionized
the study of the family tree.
( camera shutter clicking )
SEVERSON:
People have been tracing
their family trees
since biblical times.
And after the Second World War,
genealogy--
the study of human ancestry--
became an even
more popular hobby.
I don't think that
I've ever met a person
who isn't interested
in who they are
and how they're connected
to other people
and essentially
everybody else in the world.
With this ring,
I thee wed.
SEVERSON:
Tracing your heritage
isn't easy.
Family trees never
stop branching out,
which means they create
increasingly complex
relationships between relatives.
Grandparents die,
children move away,
there's divorce and remarriage.
So genealogies can
often hit a dead end.
Family secrets slowly
become hidden in history.
But DNA--
our definitive family record--
has the capacity to expose
genealogical connections
like never before.
Diahan Southard
of Relative Genetics in Utah
is helping to amass
a DNA database.
There's tons of things you
can learn about your ancestry
on paper.
But there's even more, I think,
you can learn about
your ancestry through DNA,
as paper only goes so far and
it can only tell you so much.
But your DNA
really does reveal...
It carries everything
there is to know about you.
SEVERSON:
So mysteries that have
long stumped archivists--
tracking where families
have moved,
finding long-lost relatives--
these and other mysteries
now might be solved
through DNA analysis.
Relative Genetics
is just one
of several companies
in the United States
offering DNA analysis to amateur
and professional genealogists.
DNA samples are
typically collected
by scraping cells
from inside the mouth.
Technicians and
million-dollar gene machines
then extract strands
of the subject's DNA
and replicate or amplify it
using a technique called
polymerase chain reaction.
COMPUTER:
About PCR:
polymerase chain reaction.
PCR has transformed
molecular biology
through vastly extending
the capacity
to identify, manipulate
and reproduce DNA,
allowing scientists
to analyze genetic samples
that previously
could not be tested
because of poor quality
or small amounts.
The starting material for PCR
is the "target sequence,"
a gene or segment of DNA.
The complementary strands
of a double-stranded molecule
of DNA are separated by heating.
Within a short time,
millions of exact replicas
of the target sequence
will have been produced
through repeated heating
and cooling cycles.
This process is known
as PCR amplification
and creates enough DNA
for identification and research.
SEVERSON:
Old techniques allowed
genealogists to track
maternal and paternal lines
separately,
but couldn't cross-reference
the data.
DNA analysis
will be able to do both.
SOUTHARD:
It's easy for genealogists
because genealogy
is based on surnames
and it's based on tracking
the name of someone
to the name of someone else.
And so when you're tracking
the name of someone,
you're also tracking their DNA,
and that's what we're using.
SEVERSON:
Still, family tree research
using mitochondrial DNA
and y chromosome analysis
has some flaws.
If a mother bore only sons
for one generation,
her link to the future
was broken.
The same can be said for a
father who sired only daughters.
Southard, along with researchers
at Brigham Young University
in Utah, are collecting
genealogical
and genetic information
from 100,000 individuals
around the globe,
representing the world's
different populations.
They are conducting DNA analysis
on samples from every individual
in a massive database,
testing for patterns
not just in the y chromosome
and mitochondrial DNA,
but 250 varied points
on the complete human genome.
SOUTHARD:
Then you see what's common
about their genealogy
and what's common
about their genetics,
and when those two things
overlap, then we've found
a genetic marker
that identifies that population.
You compare them one person
to another, and you can see
how each individual
is unique on their own,
and yet how they share
with different people who
descend from the same area.
SEVERSON:
The scientist responsible
for this ambitious project
is Scott Woodward.
WOODWARD:
We can reconstruct
gene pools in the past.
We can now type an individual
who doesn't know anything
about their genealogy
or who they are
and tell them, with a high
degree of probability,
where their genes were
a generation ago, two, three,
four, five generations ago.
It's useful mostly
because it doesn't lie.
While your paper trail
could lead you
in completely
the wrong direction,
while you will run into two men
who have the same name--
John Wilson--
you will never run into two men
who have the same DNA.
SEVERSON:
But DNA reveals the truth:
we are all related,
and more closely
than we might think.
WOODWARD:
Everyone has two parents.
They have four grandparents
and eight great-grandparents,
and if you keep going back
for 30 generations,
there are one billion potential
ancestors for each one of us.
We share ancestors.
There weren't enough people
living on the earth
to take care
of each one of us to have
one billion unique ancestors,
unique ancestors 750 years ago.
So that means we all essentially
have married our cousins.
And genealogy is a way
of discovering that.
Evolution has been at work
since the first single-cell
organism appeared
some three and a half billion
years ago.
It has taken that long
for natural selection
to produce an animal
that could study evolution.
As we study our own development,
we have made some
interesting discoveries.
By analyzing our
mitochondrial DNA,
we can trace our lineage back
some 150,000 years
to the ancestral
mother of all humans,
the so-called African,
or mitochondrial, "Eve"
that all humans seem to share
as their original mother.
A British researcher,
Bryan Sykes,
thinks that most who claim
European ancestry
are descended from seven
so-called "Daughters of Eve"
who existed from 10,000
to 45,000 years ago.
He's got a company now,
Oxford Ancestors it's called--
Sykes is a professor at Oxford--
and they recently mailed me
this DNA kit
to see which of the
seven Daughters of Eve
I might have descended from.
You've probably
seen this before--
a swab to scrape cells
from inside a cheek,
the sort of thing you do
to prove that you really are
heir to all those millions
and that you're not
a monkey's uncle.
Let me read the directions.
It says, "Rinse your mouth
with water
"to remove food
and other debris.
"Remove the brush
from its pocket,
"taking care not to touch
the bristles with you fingers.
"Rub the bristles on your inner
cheek five times on each side.
"Try to avoid touching
your teeth,
"as bacteria collect there.
Replace the brush
inside the pocket."
Seal it, and send it off,
back to England,
and in a few weeks
they promise to let me know
who my greatest of
all grandmothers was--
perhaps Ursula or Helena
or Xenia.
Wasn't she a warrior princess?
Tara?
Who picked these names,
a Hollywood agent?
One thing you see when you look
at this location map
of the Seven Daughters
is that their tribes had all
migrated thousands of miles
from their original
African home.
MAN:
You can see how much of
our environment has changed.
In the last 100,000 years,
we move out of Africa,
we go to very cold climate,
very warm climate,
very wet, very dry climate,
and the north, south--
everywhere.
So we change our habitat
and we develop agriculture,
so we change our diet.
We now can live in
very dense habitation,
because the food supply
is now very abundant.
And once you live
in such close proximity,
all the pathogens--
bacteria, cholera, malaria,
everything-- just multiply.
SEVERSON:
But this new animal also
has created air-conditioning,
central heat,
and modern medicine,
and that may be changing
the mutation-plus-environment
equation in another way.
WU:
A mutation can be
good-becoming-bad
or bad-becoming-good,
because environment changes.
When you have mutations
going from bad-to-good
that is evolution,
and in that respect,
human probably has been
evolving the most
compared to other species.
SEVERSON:
Even without such intervention,
bad mutations that aren't
immediately disabling
occur much faster than natural
selection can weed them out.
WU:
The very common diseases
like cardiovascular disease,
the diabetes, asthma,
and most of the common disease,
are actually caused by these--
we call them
small-effect mutations.
Each one by itself
doesn't cause much harm,
but the problem is that
we have so many of them,
and that can, in aggregate,
can be a public health concern.
Natural selection is
still able to remove
all the mutations
that come in,
but it's not doing it
fast enough,
so before a mutation
gets completely purged
from the population,
it probably would have
a sojourn time,
a retention time,
of a couple hundred generation
in a population.
So far, we haven't mentioned
one key element
implied in Darwin's theory
of natural selection: luck.
WU:
The central concept is that
of course each mutation has
a very, very small chance
of becoming fixed,
but there are so many of them.
So the analogy would be
that if you buy a million
lottery tickets,
the chance of hitting
the jackpot is pretty good,
and that is the issue
we are addressing;
that is it true
that in a molecular world
"survival of the fittest"
does not apply;
it's "survival of the luckiest"?
Recently the Smithsonian
Institutution in Washington D.C.
added some new genes
to its collection.
They include photographs
of DNA sequences
believed to belong
to O.J. Simpson,
taken during what was called
"the trial of the century"
in 1995.
This genetic evidence
was very controversial
and helped get Simpson acquitted
of murder.
It also drew
the nation's attention
to what was then a pretty new
forensic method-- DNA profiling.
But let's back up a bit.
Forensics is the application
of science to legal problems
and there's nothing new
about that.
Let's turn to our
hitchhiker's guide to the genome
for a history lesson.
( computer beeps )
COMPUTER:
In the early 1900s,
an Austrian professor discovers
that blood cells fall
into different groups.
These groups are eventually
labeled as types A, B, AB and O.
In 1917
William M. Marston invents
the first lie detector test,
claiming he can detect
verbal deception
by measuring an increase
in systolic blood pressure.
Well, thank you
so very, very much.
While we've been investigating
crimes for centuries,
it's been less than 20 years
since genetics revolutionized
the criminal justice system.
In 1984 British geneticist Alec
Jeffreys developed DNA profiling
and it's been shaking up
the process
of solving crimes ever since.
SEVERSON:
Today Kirk Bloodsworth
is a free man,
making his living on his fishing
boat on the Chesapeake Bay.
But only a few years ago,
Kirk was on the State
of Maryland's death row,
waiting to be executed
for a crime he didn't commit.
In the summer of 1984, a young
girl was raped and murdered
in Kirk's neighborhood.
Authorities were sure
Kirk had done it.
He lived near the crime scene
and he looked like a police
sketch of the suspected killer.
BLOODSWORTH:
Well, I didn't know
what to think.
To tell you the truth,
I was in utter shock and
disbelief by the whole thing.
I really can't explain it
other than, you know,
I knew that it was wrong and
they shouldn't be doing this.
But the problem with that was is
that nobody would listen to me.
It was almost like
I was a nonparty to it,
although I was the one
that was the center of it all.
SEVERSON:
Kirk was a former U.S. marine
who had never been
in serious trouble with the law,
but he was convicted of rape
and murder
and was sentenced to die
in the gas chamber.
He was 23 years old.
BLOODSWORTH:
You're in your cell by yourself
and, uh, every day you wake up,
it's another day closer
that they're going to walk you
to the gas chamber
and, uh, to your last breath,
and you're waiting to die.
I can't even begin
to articulate the anguish
that you endure during
that, uh, process.
It's brutal on the... the soul.
SEVERSON:
Kirk spent two years
on death row
before his sentence
was reduced to life in prison.
He kept hoping someone
would believe he was innocent.
For nine years,
almost no one did,
until DNA profiling came along.
( computer beeps )
COMPUTER:
About DNA profiling:
DNA-- deoxyribonucleic acid--
is the molecule responsible
for every person's
genetic makeup.
It is composed
of four nucleotide bases,
arranged in a double helix
or spiral.
DNA is in virtually every cell
in the human body.
With the exception of identical
or monozygotic twins,
no two people have the same DNA.
Since each person's DNA sequence
is unique,
DNA evidence collected
from a crime scene
can link a suspect to a crime
or eliminate one from suspicion
in the same way
that fingerprints are used.
This is called a DNA profile.
SEVERSON:
In prison, Kirk read a book
about how DNA testing in England
had helped police find a killer.
He was sure it could help him,
too, in a different way.
I felt that if it
could prove somebody did it,
it could also prove
that they didn't do it.
SEVERSON:
When Kirk was sentenced
back in 1985,
biological samples
weren't tested for DNA,
but by the early '90s, forensic
scientists could test for it--
even very small amounts.
When a semen stain
on the murdered girl's clothing
was tested,
it came back negative
for Kirk's DNA.
He was pardoned and became
the first death row inmate ever
to be freed by DNA evidence.
The re killer
is still out there,
and all of this
won't be complete
until the real one
is behind bars.
With the advent
of the DNA technology, uh,
it's revolutionized
forensic science
at least to the extent
that fingerprints did
a hundred years ago.
It's... it's easily
one of the single most important
revolutions in forensic science
in the last two decades.
SEVERSON:
Paul Ferrara
is director of Virginia's
Division of Forensic Sciences.
He says DNA technology
has changed
almost every aspect
of law enforcement
from the crime scene
to the courtroom.
FERRARA:
They are changing the way
they look at potential evidence.
Anything that might contain
some biological, uh, remnant
of an individual
is being collected
and it can be dental floss,
toothbrushes, um,
hairbrushes, uh, you name it.
If it's been in contact
with a perpetrator,
it's entirely possible
for us to develop a DNA profile.
Ten years ago
they wouldn't even conceive
of collecting something
like that.
SEVERSON:
Authorities now have stacks
of evidence to test.
They look for hair,
saliva, blood or semen--
anything that might yield DNA.
Even microscopic quantities
are sufficient for testing.
FERRARA:
In the early days
of DNA technology,
uh, you'd require a blood stain
the size of a quarter
to get a DNA profile.
With the advent
of the new technologies today,
we're able to develop
a DNA profile
from material that can't
even be seen with the naked eye.
SEVERSON:
The most common type
of DNA analysis today uses PCR,
which stands
for "polymerase chain reaction."
PCR allows investigators
to analyze evidence
that couldn't be tested before
because there wasn't enough DNA
or it was of poor quality.
PCR copies the DNA
over and over again--
a kind of chemical Xeroxing.
This amplification process
creates enough DNA
to generate a profile.
But with small amounts of DNA,
a sample is easily contaminated.
That's when DNA from
an outside source gets mixed up
with the DNA being tested.
It can happen
when someone sneezes on a sample
or handles it with bare hands.
Contamination of evidence
was one of the many charges made
by the O.J. Simpson
defense team.
But even if a sample
is contaminated,
scientists say the original DNA
is still around.
FERRARA:
There's nothing in DNA testing
that would allow an examiner
to mistakenly identify
one DNA profile
as belonging to someone else.
If you contaminate a sample,
you have just introduced
a second DNA profile
on top of the original.
It doesn't change
the DNA profile.
SEVERSON:
All lab workers in Virginia
have their own DNA profiles
on record.
So if their DNA has contaminated
a sample, they can identify it.
But how do you decide
whose DNA it is?
Well, it turns out that while
we're nearly 100% the same,
there are a few sections
of our genetic code
where we differ quite a bit.
13 of those spots are typically
used to generate a DNA profile.
FERRARA:
In recent years,
all of the forensic science
community in the U.S.
and most of the forensic
community around the world
use these same genetic markers.
These portions of DNA are called
STRs, or short tandem repeats.
They're portions of the DNA sort
of between the actual genes.
SEVERSON:
The real investigative power
of DNA
is in cases
where there is no suspect.
This CODIS database
contains DNA profiles
from convicted criminals.
Authorities link unknown DNA
left at a crime scene
with the DNA in the database.
Sometimes they find
a perfect match--
what's called "a cold hit."
MAN:
We develop a DNA profile
from the evidence in this case
and then search the database
against convicted offenders,
and the computer search finds
that an individual
in the database
actually is completely matching
the profile from the evidence.
And then we are able
to give the police a name
of an individual to go talk to,
to investigate further,
helping them solve the case
when they have no idea
where to look
or who committed a crime.
SEVERSON:
And DNA, like justice, is blind.
If you're guilty,
it's your worst enemy.
If you're innocent,
it's your best friend.
BLOODSWORTH:
I would say the DNA
was a magic wand for me.
It's a magic wand
for any innocent man,
but it'll be your
damning thing if you did it
and, uh, that's what we need.
And it's...
it's almost like, um,
some sort of superhero
type of element
that we have in society
and without it,
I would still be there.
To be a free man,
a free, innocent person
and, uh, just to be
a regular guy
is, uh, more joy than
I could possibly put into words.
*